# Automating Geospatial Visualizations with Smart Default Renderers for Data Exploration Web Applications

Ekenes, Kristian A. (2017), Automating Geospatial Visualizations with Smart Default Renderers for Data Exploration Web Applications (IN24A-03) presented at 2017 AGU Fall Meeting, New Orleans, LA, 11-15 Dec.

## Abstract

This presentation will outline the process of creating a web application for exploring large amounts of scientific geospatial data using modern automated cartographic techniques. Traditional cartographic methods, 
including data classification, may inadvertently hide geospatial and statistical patterns in the underlying data. This presentation demonstrates how to use smart web APIs that quickly analyze the data when it loads, 
and provides suggestions for the most appropriate visualizations based on the statistics of the data. Since there are just a few ways to visualize any given dataset well, it is imperative to provide smart default 
color schemes tailored to the dataset as opposed to static defaults. Since many users don’t go beyond default values, it is preferable that they are provided with smart default visualizations.

Multiple functions for automating visualizations are available in the Smart APIs, along with UI elements allowing users to create more than one visualization for a dataset since there isn’t a 
single best way to visualize a given dataset. Since bivariate and multivariate visualizations are particularly difficult to create effectively, this automated approach removes the guesswork out 
of the process and provides a number of ways to generate multivariate visualizations for the same variables. This allows the user to choose which visualization is most appropriate for their presentation. 
The methods used in these APIs and the renderers generated by them are not available elsewhere.

The presentation will show how statistics can be used as the basis for automating default visualizations of data along continuous ramps, creating more refined visualizations while revealing the spread and 
outliers of the data. Adding interactive components to instantaneously alter visualizations allows users to unearth spatial patterns previously unknown among one or more variables. These applications may 
focus on a single dataset that is frequently updated, or configurable for a variety of datasets from multiple sources.